- Wolf, Ruben, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Hello. - Hello.
- Thanks for having us. - Hello, hello.
Yeah, it's great to have you here.
We're going to dive into packaging once again.
And we've talked about packaging a couple times
over the last few months.
It's a super interesting topic.
And there are these times where it seems like
there's a fixed way and everyone kind of agrees,
like this is how you do things.
For example, I think Flask and Django
have kind of been web frameworks for a long time.
Then all of a sudden, a thousand flowers bloom
and there's a bunch of new ideas.
In the web space, I think that was driven by async
and the typing stuff.
And a bunch of people said, well, let's try new things
now that we have these new ideas.
And the other frameworks were more stable,
couldn't make those adjustments.
And I think people are just,
we're kind of at one of these explosion points
of different ideas and different experiments in packaging.
What do you all think?
- Yeah, I think that's an interesting way to put it.
I think we definitely see a lot of interest
in package management these days
and new ideas being explored.
But I also think that we're definitely standing
on the shoulders of giants,
so kind of similar to what you just described
with the web frameworks,
where actually I think we are taking a lot of inspiration
from multiple different ecosystems that are out there
and try to kind of synthesize the best ideas.
- Yeah, well. - Into our tools.
- Yeah, you got some interesting ideas for sure.
Ruben?
- I cannot really add to that anymore.
I'm standing on the shoulders of giants like, whoa.
So. - Yeah, absolutely.
- I think we'll go into that.
- Yeah, we sure will.
Now, before we get into the topics,
let's just do a quick introduction
for folks who don't know you.
I feel like this is a really interesting coincidence
'cause the very last previous show that I did
was with Sylvan and Jeremy,
a bunch of folks from QuantStack.
And, you know, just out of coincidence,
like I said, your colleagues, right?
So Wolf, let's start with you, a little background on you.
- Sure.
Yeah, so I did work at QuantStack for quite a while.
And it's also where my journey
with package management began.
But maybe just taking one more step back,
I studied in Zurich and I actually graduated
in robotics there with a master's degree.
And yeah. - That's awesome.
- I had some fun times.
I was also working with Disney Research
on like a little robot that was drawing images in the sand
and these kind of fun things.
But at QuantStack, we were doing a lot
of scientific computing stuff.
Initially trying to like reimplement NumPy in C++,
which is a library called XTensor
and always doing a lot of package management
and mostly in the CondaForge and Conda ecosystem.
And Conda at some point became really slow
and CondaForge became really large.
And that led me to kind of experiment with new things,
which resulted in Mamba.
And then I got really lucky and had the opportunity
to create my own little startup
around more of these package management ideas,
which is the current company called Prefix.
And we'll dive more into Pixie and all these new things
that we're doing, I think, later on.
- Yeah, that's a lot of interesting stuff.
What language do you program a robot
that writes in the sand in?
- It's always a mix of Python and C++.
So I think I stuck to that up until now.
- Yeah, yeah, it sounds like it.
Ruben, what's your story?
Tell people a bit about yourself.
- Yeah, so I also started in robotics.
I did a mechatronics engineering degree.
And while working in robotics,
I started at my previous company, Smart Robotics.
And there we were building the new modern AI-driven robots.
So that also involves a lot of deep learning packages
and stuff like that.
And that is kind of how I got
into these package management solutions.
And we started using Conda to package our C++
and our Python stuff, and to make it easy to use
in these virtual environments,
where we combine those packages.
And it all was made easier by Mamba,
which was built by Wolf.
So that's how we got in touch.
And later on, I moved to Wolf's company.
So that's why I'm here now.
- Excellent.
So you're a prefix dev as well?
- Yes.
- Awesome.
- I'm an expert dev there, yep.
- Cool, well, I guess let's start
with a little bit of maybe setting the stage.
So you all talked about Conda and Conda Forge,
and really relying on that for a while.
And then wanting better performance,
some other features we're gonna talk about as well.
But give us a quick background
for those maybe non-data scientists,
or people who are not super into it.
What is Conda, and what is Conda Forge,
and the relationship of those things?
Who wants to take that?
- Yeah.
So Conda is, generally speaking, a package manager.
Like, that's all it is.
It actually has nothing specific to AI
and data science, et cetera.
But most people associate it
with Python and machine learning, let's say.
And Conda's written in Python,
and it's like, I don't know, 10 or 15 years old.
And it kind of comes out of an era
where there were no wheel files on PyPI,
and people had to compile stuff on their own machines.
- Right, you can't use this.
Where's your Fortran compiler?
Come on, you're like, what?
What year is this again?
- And you need your GCC, et cetera.
So that's kind of when Conda was born.
And I think it really was one of those early tools
that tried something
with binary package management cross-platform.
So basically, Conda allowed you to install Python
and a bunch of Python packages
that needed compiled extensions,
like NumPy, SciPy, et cetera.
And it kind of comes out of this Travis Olyphant universe
of scientific Python tools.
- Yeah, he's made a huge impact, for sure.
- Yeah.
But for us, sort of the key feature
is just that it's like a cross-platform
generic package manager
that you can actually use for any language.
So you can also create Conda packages for R,
and there are actually quite a few R packages
on Conda for us, let's say.
And you can also do Julia or Rust, et cetera.
So there's a lot of possibility and potential.
And I think it also kind of hits a sweet spot
where Conda is really not
a language-specific package manager.
And it's at the same time cross-platform,
because usually what you have
is you have either like
some sort of like Windows package manager
or Linux package manager, like apt-get,
or DNF on Fedora,
or you have like a language-specific package manager,
like pip or julia has package.jl,
or I don't know, R has CRAN, et cetera.
And so Conda kind of sits at the crossroads of those two,
where it's not language-specific and also cross-platform.
And I think that makes it like really interesting.
And then maybe I can also talk a little bit
about Conda Forge,
because I think that's the other really impactful part
about the Conda universe,
where Conda Forge is really a group of,
I think over 5,000 individual people
that are building packages in GitHub repositories.
And each of those repositories
basically builds a recipe on a CI system
that then kind of results in the artifact,
which is a Conda package that you can install.
And so all of the packages on Conda Forge
are built on CI systems.
And most of them are cross-platform available.
So you have them for Windows, macOS, and Linux.
And those packages are all the low-level stuff.
Usually Conda starts at the glibc level, let's say.
So glibc is that fundamental library
that we need to get from the operating system.
And on Windows and macOS,
there's an SDK and other DLLs
that we need from the operating system.
But everything above is managed by Conda or Mamba or Pixi.
So all of these tools work
on the base of the same packages.
And that starts at bzip2 or zlib,
like these low-level compression libraries,
OpenSSL, and then up to Python.
And then you can also get Qt,
which is a graphical user interface library,
which is written in C++.
And applications that are building on top of Qt,
so like, for example, physics simulation engines
and stuff like this.
So, and you also get QDA and lots of libraries like this.
And it's, all is not bound
to like a specific operating system in that sense.
And that makes it pretty, pretty nice.
For example, also in CI,
when you want to test your own software and stuff like this,
you can use the same commands
to set up basically the same packages
across different, yeah, platforms.
- Yeah, nice.
And so kind of like what Wheels did for pip and pypi,
Conda was way ahead of that game, right?
But with a harder challenge
because it wasn't just Python packages,
it was all these different ones, right?
- Yeah.
Yeah, including Python itself.
So that's also one of the things
that people sometimes maybe not realize,
but Python itself is actually properly packaged
in Conda for us and installable via Conda or Mamba or Pixie.
- Mm-hmm, excellent.
Ruben, any thing you want to add to that
before we start talking about what you all are creating?
- Yeah, so from my history,
it's like this multi-platform stuff
is left used in robotics
because a lot of the stuff is still running in Linux,
but it moved it from the ability to run it only on Ubuntu
to, yeah, any version you want.
And you could install any version of the robotic software
you're running on like any version of Ubuntu.
So where we were locked, not just to Linux,
but locked to a distribution of Linux,
we were now like completely unbound
and the developers can set their own environments,
which is just really powerful for the user itself.
And that brought it back into our company
in a much better way.
- Yeah, that's excellent.
I'm always blown away at how much traffic
these package managers have,
how much bandwidth they use and things like that.
Who's hosting Conda Forge
and where you get that stuff from?
- So currently, Conda Forge
is entirely hosted by anaconda.org.
We do have a couple of mirrors available,
but they are not really used.
But one of the more exciting mirrors that we have
is on GitHub itself.
GitHub has this GitHub packages feature
and we are using an OCI registry
where you would usually put your like Docker containers
and stuff like that.
We upload all the Conda packages there just as a backup.
And we're planning to make it usable as well.
So that would be nice for like your own GitHub actions
and stuff because they could just like take the package
from sort of GitHub internal.
- Right, just write down the server rack in the data center.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Keep it local.
It's always good to be local.
- Yep.
- Okay, cool.
So let's, I wanna focus mostly on Pixie for our conversation
because I think that's got a lot of excitement.
Maybe we'll get some time to talk about Mamba
and other things as well.
But yeah, you all wrote this interesting announcement
and entitled, "Let's Stop Dependency Hell,"
talking about Pixie here.
And so I think we can just sort of talk through
some of the ideas you laid out there
and that'll give people a good idea of what this is all about.
- Yeah, let's do it.
- Yeah.
So first of all, let's start with some of the problems
you're trying to solve here.
So say we've all experienced issues with reproducibility
and dependency management.
I will tell you just yesterday,
and if it was later in the day for me,
it would probably be today,
I'm running into a problem with my courses website
where I try to install both the developer dependencies
and the production dependencies.
And it's like, this one requires
greater than this dependency,
and this one requires less than that dependency.
You can't install it.
I'm like, well, how am I supposed to do this?
I'd rather have it shaky than impossible.
So, you know, it's dependency challenges
are all too present for me.
But yeah, let's maybe you can lay out some of the ideas,
like what you had in mind when you're talking
about reproducibility and challenges here.
- Yeah, I think you're not alone, first of all.
So a lot of people have these kind of problems,
and it's also not only in the Python world, let's say,
but I think it's maybe a bit more pronounced
in the Python world,
because there are so many packages
and the way that package management in the Python world works.
- Yeah, I feel like we can always look over
at the JavaScript.
People feel a little bit better,
but it's still a challenge for us.
- That's true, yeah.
So, well, we are, with Pixie, just to take one step back.
So we kind of started to, again,
rewrite the entirety of how you manage conda packages.
With Pixie or with the lower level tools
that we're using in Pixie, which are called,
it's like a set of crates
that is under the Redlar repository.
And those are like, I don't know, eight or nine crates
that basically do everything from like fetching the package,
resolving the versions that you want to have,
reading the metadata from the packages
and linking it into the virtual environment,
because we're creating these virtual environments
on the hard drive and we have a central cache
and things like this.
And so Redlar is kind of the low level tools
that take care of all of this.
And it's written more or less from scratch in Rust.
I mean, obviously we're reusing a lot of the nice things
that we found in the Rust ecosystem.
So there are many very useful crates,
but yeah, basically that's sort of the bottom line thing
that we're doing.
And what's also nice about it
is that we are spinning off multiple things
from the same set of crates.
So it's not only Pixie,
there's also one thing called Redlar build,
which is actually building the conda packages.
And there is another,
and then we have the backend of our website,
prefix.dev, which is also written in Rust
and also uses Redlar underneath.
So that's really nice for us.
- So maybe if I was,
if I wanted to stick with say conda,
could I still use Redlar build
and then somehow upload that to conda forge
something along those lines?
- Yeah. - Okay.
- You can totally,
that's kind of the baseline sort of commonality
between all of these tools
is that we are sharing the same sort of conda packages
and the same metadata.
And like, yeah,
we definitely want to be 100% compatible package-wise
with conda for now.
- Excellent.
- We might have features later on,
but we wanna go through,
like conda as a project has also
become much more community oriented
and there's like a process
called conda enhancement proposals.
And we have already written a few of those.
So there are many ideas,
but we can talk about that later.
- Yeah, trying to improve the overall system
instead of overthrow it.
- Yes, yes.
Yeah, like we would love to like improve the entirety
of like conda packages, conda forge and all of this.
Like that's our main dream.
But yeah, so,
and then with some of the low level tools
in Redline with Pixi,
we're kind of combining a bunch of tools
that already existed.
And one thing essential for reproducibility
is that you have log files.
So at the point where you are sort of resolving
your dependencies,
we are also writing them into a log file
and that's like something known from poetry,
from NPM, Yarn, Cargo also has it.
And there's also a conda project
that's called conda log
that writes log files.
And so we have adopted the same format
that conda log uses,
which is a YAML based log file format
and implemented in Redline
and we are exposing it and using it in Pixi.
So anytime you like add a new dependency to your project,
we write it in a log file
and we make sure that like,
you can install the same packages,
the same set of packages,
the same versions and SHA hashes
in like the future.
And the other part about reproducibility
and that's more on the repository side
is that conda forge never deletes old packages.
So that's similar to PyPI,
but not really this,
like it's different in a lot of like Linux distributions,
but with PyPI,
it's also the case that,
you know, old versions are just kept around.
- Do you ever worry that that might not be sustainable?
Like it's fine now,
I mean, 20 years of like,
we cannot pay for the thing from 20 years.
Like it's, we just can't get enough donations
to support Flask 0.1.
We just can't, it's out.
- I mean, sure.
Like that's the problem of the person
that uses Flask 0.1, right?
That's not the problem of the repository.
I think we just make sure that,
you could still run it
and you should probably sandbox it like crazy
so that there are no like zero days
that could affect your system.
- Well, also you do have some things
that are like self-hosted conda capabilities
that maybe we'll get a chance to talk about.
Like theoretically you could download these
and save as a company or an organization or a researcher,
you could get the ones that actually count for you, right?
- Yeah.
Like, I mean, only have a subset of the packages
that you need.
- Yeah, say I'm using 50 packages
with the transitive closure of everything I'm using.
And so I'm just gonna make sure I have every version
of those on Dropbox or on a hard drive I put away somewhere.
Yeah.
- It's actually pretty funny
because what you create on your local system
is a cache of all the packages that you ever used.
And you could activate that cache as a channel,
like what CondaForge is,
you could make your own channel
of all your packages locally.
This is something we used when internet went down
in our company and we still needed to share packages
with each other.
We needed to make our environments
and just some people would spin up their own channel
and you could use it from there.
It's just a different.
- Oh, awesome.
Yeah, yeah, that's awesome.
Cool, I derailed your,
there we go.
- No, but yeah, I think like log files
are the basis for reproducibility.
And then the fact that packages are never deleted.
And I think that's something that like log files
make it look a little bit like a Docker container sort of,
because you know exactly what's in your software environment.
We don't control the outside
and we don't do sandboxing as of now,
but that's kind of the way we think about log files.
And it just makes it very convenient
also to ship basically that log file
plus the Pixie Toml and stuff to your coworker
and they can just run it.
And we also resolve for multiple operating systems
at the same time.
So you can say, you can specify in your Pixie Toml
if you want Linux, macOS and Windows,
and we resolve everything at the same time
in parallel with async Rust code and stuff like this.
So it's pretty fast and nice.
And yeah, the idea is that you can send it to your coworker.
They can just do a Pixie run start,
which would just give them everything they need
and have them up and going.
- Yeah, really cool.
So in your announcement for Pixie,
one of the things you said is you're looking
for the convenience of modern package managers,
such as Cargo.
What's different than say pip and PyPI versus Cargo?
Like when you say that, what are these new features?
Like I wish we had this already.
We don't, so I'm gonna build it.
- So,
I think one thing that's just really nice with Cargo is,
and that also attracts so many contributors to Rust project,
at least, like that's the way I feel about it,
is that it's so easy to just say Cargo run whatever,
and it's most of the time works
and you just do Cargo build and like it builds
and that's the experience that we want to recreate with Pixie
and Cargo also comes with log files
and Cargo just does this pretty nicely.
I mean, there are some peculiarities
about how Rust builds packages or things about dependencies
where the result is pretty different,
let's say from like Python ecosystem and stuff like this,
but the baseline experience is definitely
what we're also striving for.
And part of the problem is maybe also
that pip is not managing Python.
So you always have that,
a little bit of a chicken and egg problem
where you need to get Python first to be able to run Pip.
And with Pixie, you don't have that problem
because we also manage Python.
So you can specify in your Pixie terminal
what version of Python you want.
You get it on Windows, macOS and Linux in the same way.
And everything is just one command
and everything is also locked in your log file, et cetera.
So that's kind of, yeah,
we just control a bit more than Pip.
And I think that's what's giving us some power.
And then pip also, like as far as I'm aware,
and we recently had discussions
with Python package management developers.
They haven't come up with a log file format
that works for everyone yet.
So Poetry has their own implementation
and a bunch of other tools
maybe have their own implementations.
- Right, there's the pip log from Pipenv and others, yeah.
- Right, yeah.
But yeah, so we're also kind of working on that.
I don't know if you saw that,
but we just announced another tool
that's also low level,
sort of on the same level as Red Lab,
but it's called RIP
and it deals with Python resolving and wheel files.
And so we want to kind of cross over those two worlds
where we resolve the Connor packages first
and we resolve the Python packages after,
and we stick everything into the same log file
that will for now be similar to the,
yeah, basically based on the Conda log format,
which is a YAML file.
- Interesting, so this RIP,
I'm familiar with that,
I didn't necessarily in my mind tie it back to Pixie,
but would that allow you to,
could you mix and match?
Like some stuff comes off Conda forwards
and some stuff comes off of PyPI,
but you express that in your dependency file?
- Yeah, like there are parts of the semantics
that aren't yet figured out, let's say,
but the idea is definitely that you can install Python
and NumPy, for example, from Conda forwards,
and then, I don't know, scikit-learn from PyPI.
Like that's maybe not the example of how you would use it,
but-- - Yeah, of course, right.
Maybe you do one of the web frameworks, right?
Like FastAPI versus some of the scientific stuff from Conda.
- Yeah, I find at least the official Conda stuff,
sometimes certain frameworks are a little bit behind
and there are situations where having the latest one
within an hour matters a lot.
You know, for example, hey, it turns out,
theoretically, this is not real,
it turns out that, say, Flask has a super bad
remote code execution problem.
We just found out that if you send a cat emoji
as part of the URL, it's all over.
So patch it now, right?
Like you don't wanna wait for that
to like slowly get through some,
you need that now, right?
In PyPI, I find it's kind of the tip
of the latest in that regard.
- Yeah, so I do agree to some extent.
So it's like we also found that a lot of,
there are these noarch packages, like pure Python packages,
and I think, and there's just way more packages on PyPI,
and the turn of managing that on Conda Forge is a bit high.
So that's also like, we have lots of reasons,
and also in real world examples,
we often find people mixing PyPI, pip, and Conda.
So that's why we're thinking like,
we need proper sort of support for PyPI in our tool
to make it really nice for Python developers.
- Yeah, it would take it to another level for sure,
and it would certainly make it stand out
from what Conda does or what pip does, honestly.
- Yeah, and like Conda, for example,
there is a way to kind of like add some Python dependency
or pip dependencies, but it's really just invoking pip
as like a sub process,
and then installing some additional stuff
into your environment.
And it's not really nice, not really tightly integrated,
and so we actually kind of did the work
and wrote a resolver in Rust, so SAT solver,
and we've just extended it to also deal with Python
or PyPI metadata, which is kind of what RIP is.
- Yeah, so that's going to be very interesting
to figure out how to integrate those things
and like really make them work nicely together.
- Yeah, I wanna talk about the ergonomics using Pixie,
but first, you know, baby Ruben,
you could address this first,
but I opened this whole conversation
with a thousand flowers blooming
around the package management story,
and I think for a long time,
what people had seen was they're going to try
to innovate within Python, so you install Python,
you create your environment,
and then like you have a different workflow
with different tools.
But they're starting, some of the new ideas
are starting to move to the outside,
like we'll also manage Python itself.
If you say you want Python 3.10
and you only have 3.11 installed, we'll take care of that.
And something built on Python has a real hard time
installing Python, 'cause there's this chicken and egg,
probably needs it first, right?
And it sounds like you all are taking that approach
of we're gonna be outside of Python,
you know, built in Rust or any binary
that just runs on its own would work.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Have a greater control, right?
So yeah, I know, just what are your thoughts on that?
- Yeah, so one of the strong points is Pixie
that you can install it as a standalone binary,
so you have a simple script
or you can even just download it
and put it in your machine
and then you can install whatever you want.
So you're not limited to Python alone.
And in a lot of cases, you wanna mix a lot of stuff.
Sometimes you need a specific version of SSH
or sometimes you need a specific version of OpenSSL
or whatever that needs your package.
And you would have these long lists of getting started
to like, oh, you need to install this with APT
or you need to install this with name anything,
any other package manager,
and then you can run pip install
and then it should all work.
And Pixie kinda moves it back to you have to have Pixie
and you have to have the source code of the package
that you're running or you're directly like using Pixie
to install something.
And like you're most of the time,
just two commands away from running the actual code
that you're trying to run
instead of going to read some kind of readme
from a person on the internet.
- Yeah, and it's also pretty challenging for newcomers
to programming. - Yes, exactly.
- You're like, I just wanna run this.
Yeah, exactly, I just wanna run this.
You're like, but what am I doing all this terminal stuff?
Like, I just wanna run, I wrote the program,
I want it to go.
I feel like maybe that's part of why notebooks
and that whole notebooks, Jupyter side of things
is so popular because like assuming somebody
has created a server and got it started for you,
like you don't worry about those things, right?
- Yeah, exactly. - Yeah.
So let's talk about kind of that beginner experience.
If you have an example on your website somewhere
where it just shows, if you just check out a repository
that's already been configured to use Pixie,
it's just clone, Pixie, run, is it run start
or something like that, right?
You don't have to create the environments
and even that could potentially happen without Python
even on the machine initially, right?
- So yeah, so a funny part of Pixie is,
Pixie itself is a Pixie project.
So if we want to build Pixie, it is a Rust project,
but we run Pixie run build in this case,
or Pixie run install.
So you kind of move everything back into the tasks in Pixie
and you can run it using Pixie.
And Pixie will take care of your environment.
- Yeah, so basically, as I also said before,
we are learning a lot, for example, from Cargo.
So we also have a single Pixie Toml file
that kind of defines all of your dependencies,
a bit of metadata about your project,
and then you can define these tasks.
And so like what we see on the screen
is that we have a task that's called start
and that just runs Python main.py.
So that's pretty straightforward.
But obviously, like you can go further,
like you can have tasks that depend on other tasks
and that we're learning a lot from.
There's a project called taskfile.dev.
And we also want to integrate caching into these tasks
so that if you like one task might download something
on your system, like some assets that you need,
like images and stuff.
And if you already have them cached,
then you don't need to re-download them
and these kinds of things.
So we're really like wanting to build a simple,
but powerful task system in there.
And that benefits greatly
from having these dependencies available.
Because like in this case, what we see on the screen,
we have two dependencies and one of those is Python 3.11.
And that means the moment you run Pixie run start,
it will actually look at the log file
and look at what you have
in your local environment installed
and the environments are always local to the project,
which is also a difference to Condite Mamba.
So it will look into that environment
and check if Python 3.11 is there.
And if the version that you have in your environment
corresponds to the one that's listed in the log file,
and if not, it will download the version
and install it into your environment
and like make sure that you have all the stuff
that's necessary or listed to run what you need.
- Nice.
So for example, you got in your example,
Python 3.11 for some flexibility
there on the very, very end.
Does that download a binary version
or does it build from source
or what happens when it needs that?
- Yeah, so typically, like Conda
is a binary package manager.
So usually what you download is binary.
We're working on the source dependency capabilities,
where also Rackler build, what I mentioned before,
is going to play a big role.
Because the idea is that you can also run Pixie build
at some point soon,
and that will build your Conda package
out of your Pixie project.
But we would use the same capabilities
to basically also allow you to get local dependencies
and then build them ad hoc
and put them into your environment.
- Yeah, so I suppose it's probably,
oh, go ahead, Ruben, sorry.
- Yeah, so that comes back to the example you gave before
with the problem that there's a huge server debug
or something, and you would want to use a non-support,
yeah, a version that's not shared around the world yet.
So you need this GitHub link
and that package you need to install.
And that's something we still want to support
through this local or URL-based dependency.
But for that, you first need to be able to build it.
- Yeah, kind of like the Git plus on pip install.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
- All right, I found out where this little section was here,
where this, Pixie is made for collaboration
on your announcement,
where it just says Git clone some repo,
Pixie run, start build, whatever.
This, maybe just talk through what happens there,
because if I don't even have Python,
much less a virtual environment,
much less the things installed,
you know, if I try this at Python,
if I, they just say clone this, go here, Python run.
Like if you don't have Python,
it'll just say Python, what is that?
If you do have Python, it'll say, you know,
fast API, what is that?
Right, like there's a lot of steps
that this really simplifies.
And that's kind of what I was talking about
with the beginners as well.
Like, you know, maybe speak to what's happening here.
- Yeah, so when you do Pixie run,
it will create, and you have nothing on your system, right?
Except for Pixie and that repository.
Then it's going to create a hidden folder
inside of your project.
That's called .pixie.
And in there, it will install all of these tools
that are dependencies of the project.
So Python, NumPy, scikit-learn, whatever.
And that, like, and then when you do Pixie run,
it will invoke, actually there's a thing called
Dino task share, which we're using.
And that's basically something, like, it looks like Bash,
but it also works in Windows,
which is like the key feature here.
So that will sort of run the task.
And in this case, like some task is probably defined
inside of the Pixie Tummel.
And that might run something like Python, I don't know,
start Flask or start Jupyter or, you know,
whatever the developer desires to do.
But yeah, like the cool thing is that it will,
like in the background, activate the environment,
like the virtual environment and use it to run your software.
- Okay. Yeah, that's really cool.
- And that, yeah, most of that kind of happens
behind the scenes.
So also with Conda, for example, or Mamba,
it's usually multiple steps.
So usually what you would do is you do like,
Mamba create my environment,
and then that environment would have some name
and then you would need to do Mamba activate my environment.
And then only you would be able to run stuff.
And what you're running is also probably going
to look more complicated than just typing Pixie run,
some task, which does all of that.
- Right. The some task is almost an alias
for the actual run command, right?
- Yes.
- Yeah. Yeah.
- It could be something very complicated.
And it could also be multiple tasks
that actually run in the background
because they can depend on each other.
- Excellent.
I really like that the virtual environment
or all the binary configuration stuff
is a sub directory of the project.
That's always bothered me about Conda.
You know, if I go, I've got,
I think I have about 260 GitHub repos on my GitHub profile.
And I check out other people's stuff and check it out.
And so if I go just to my file system and I go in there,
I'm like, I haven't messed with this for a year.
Was that on the old computer?
Is on my laptop?
Is on my mini?
Like, what was that on?
I don't, so it could be I haven't set it up
or maybe I have, right?
And if I go there and I see there's a VNV folder
or something along those lines, I'm like, oh yeah,
it might be out of date,
but I definitely have done something with this here.
I probably can run it.
Whereas the Conda style, like you don't know.
What did you name it?
If you have 200 of them, what is the right one?
How do I activate it?
And then also if something kind of goes haywire,
it's like, you know what, I'm just gonna RMRF that folder
and it's out, just recreate it
on the new version of whatever, right?
But if it's somewhere else,
you know, there's just like this disconnect.
I know there's like a command flag to override
or something to like get Conda to put it locally,
but defaults are powerful, right?
And I really like that it's like there
and you can just blast away the .pixie
and start over if you need to.
- And we're also using the same tricks that Conda uses
in a bunch of other package managers.
So like if you can have these multiple environments,
but they actually share the underlying files.
So if you use the same Python 3.11 version
in multiple environments, it's not,
yeah, like you don't duplicate those files.
You don't lose a lot of storage, for example.
- Oh, that's nice.
- And the other thing that's really cool,
and I mean, Conda also gives you that,
but you can have completely different Python versions
in all of these environments.
And it's very like straightforward to use.
Like you don't need to like, I don't know,
run it through containers or stuff like that.
It's just like all in your system and yeah, very nice.
- Yeah, excellent.
Yeah, yeah.
Oops, let's see.
I would also wanna, yeah.
So one thing that I ran across here
that was pretty interesting while just researching this
is you said Pixie and Conda, like Nix,
are language agnostics.
And I'm like, what is this Nix thing?
And that brought me over to NixOS.
What is this?
- Nix or yeah, Nix basically is a functional package manager.
So it works with a functional programming language,
which is kind of an interesting idea.
And a lot of people that know Nix really love it.
So we would like for Pixie to also be as loved as Nix is
by Nix people.
And basically what's nice about
the functional programming language
is that it kind of, you know, from the input, the output,
so you can cache the function execution and you know, okay,
like if the function didn't change
and the inputs didn't change,
then the output is also not going to change.
- Right, you can cache the heck out of it.
You can parallelize it so much and so on, yeah.
- And that's kind of what, like,
that's how I understand Nix is that basically
you have a function that you execute to,
let's say, get Bash on your system
or get Python on your system.
And once you have executed that function
for that specific Python version,
you know that you have, you know,
Python with that hash in your system somewhere.
And then Nix has some magic to kind of
string things together so that
you can also sort of do something like a conda activate
where it would put the right version of Python, NumPy
and whatever you installed through Nix
onto your like system path and make it usable.
And so I think Nix and Pixie are competitors.
Anyway, the thing about the functional language
is that it also makes it like way less beginner friendly,
at least kind of my opinion.
- Yeah, I agree.
- And the way Pixie kind of works
is like really straightforward in a way.
Like you just define your dependencies
and ranges and stuff and you get the binaries.
With Nix, sometimes you need to,
like usually you build things from source,
so that's also a difference.
I think they have like distributed caches
that you could use and things like that.
But honestly, I'm not a user of Nix,
so I'm not sure how widely these caches,
like widely used these caches are.
But we definitely look at Nix
as like also another source of like inspiration.
And I think they have something really good going for them
because people that use Nix,
they are like super evangelical about it.
- Yeah.
- Well, it also probably helps
its functional programming, right?
People who do functional programming,
like they love functional programming.
- The pureness of it is pretty nice.
And then Nix OS also goes like a step further
where you can sort of manage your entire like configuration
and everything through the same system.
And that's also pretty powerful.
And maybe we can find some interesting ways
of like supporting something similar.
But in a way, like if you look at Pixie,
I think we are trying to,
like we don't actually care so much about Conda in a way,
or like maybe that's also the wrong way to put it.
But basically what we're looking is also like,
how does Docker do things?
And how does Nix do things?
And like, how can we kind of like learn from those tools?
And yeah.
- We have a pretty well-defined vision for ourselves.
And the main part is that we just want to make it easy
to get started.
So you shouldn't have to hassle
of learning a new thing to get started.
You should just know like the bare minimum of information
on how to run something.
And Pixie is there to help you.
Instead of we do something like with a complete vision
that's making it perfect.
And we're even doing it in a specific OS
that you need to install.
We want this to be used on every OS.
And we want this to be used by everyone.
So you can share your code with anyone, anywhere.
- Yeah.
- Something we really focus on.
- Sure, the clone and then just Pixie run.
That's pretty easy.
It's pretty easy for people to do, right?
- I would say so.
- Yeah.
So that's the experience
if someone's set up a project for you.
On your announcement post,
you'll have a nice little example of,
not a terribly complicated example of an app
that you might or a project you set up.
But maybe just talk through like if I want to start
with just maybe I have a GitHub repo already,
but I haven't set it up.
Like what's the process there?
- So you would, if you already have a GitHub repository
for example, you would just do Pixie init
and then give it, yeah, basically you would just say dot
because that's your current folder.
Or if you don't have anything,
you would just do something like Pixie.ini my project.
And that will create the my project folder for you
with a Pixie.toml file inside.
And then once you have that, you can do Pixie add Python
and you can use like the specifiers from Conda.
So you could do something like Python equals 3.11
and that would get you Python 3.11
into the dependencies of that project.
And then when you, and it also installed at that point.
And after it installs, it creates that log file
that you can also like should check into your repository
so that you know what the latest versions were that were
like working with the project.
- Okay.
Like the pinned, basically the pinned versions
or constraints, yeah.
- Yeah, one other thing that happens when you do Pixie add
is that it actually goes and tries to figure out
like what's the latest version that's available
for that package.
And then already puts a pin into your dependencies.
So what we see on the screen is like we do Pixie add cow pie
and then it adds cow pie 1.1.5.star.
So that's a pretty specific version already.
- Nice.
And you haven't done it here, but so the example is Pixie
run cow pie and then the parameters, hello blog reader.
And it like does the cow saying hello blog reader.
But when you talked earlier about the tasks or whatever
you could just say create a task called cow
and it is Python cow pie, hello blog reader.
Right.
And that you would just say Pixie run cow
and the same thing would happen.
Is that, do I got that all put together?
- Yep.
Yep.
That's absolutely the case.
And, but basically everything, any binary executable
that you have in your environment, like in this case,
cow pie, you can also call those Pixie run whatever.
Like, so you can do Pixie run Python
and it would start Python 3.11 or whatever you have installed
inside of that environment.
- Okay. Yeah.
And that would actually do the REPL and everything.
- Yeah. Yeah.
Just like having it globally installed.
- So one thing that does, yeah, sorry, go ahead.
- Yeah.
So one other feature of Pixie that we haven't mentioned
before is that you can still do global install.
So sometimes you have that comment line tool
that you really love.
One of the things we, I usually install is bat,
which is like cat with wings.
And so what you can do with Pixie is you can do Pixie
global installed bat and that will install bat
and make it globally available.
So you can run it from wherever it's not tied
to any like project environment.
It's just on your system in your home folder, essentially.
And you can just run bat wherever you are and it works.
- Yeah.
The one that comes to mind for me a lot is PIPX.
- As one of them.
- Where we got this kind of,
it's using similar mechanisms to that.
So every tool that you install this way
is installed into its own virtual environment.
So they don't have any overlap.
You can install versions that are completely unrelated.
- Right.
Maybe even different Pythons, right?
- Yeah.
Hey Wolf, I think you might be a little farther away
from your mic than you were before.
- Oh, sorry.
- Yeah, no worries.
Just change the volume a little.
Yeah, no worries.
One thing that I also like a lot about this,
and pour one out for poor old Pep something, something,
something about the Dunder PyPackages folder.
I can't remember what the Pep number is.
But basically the idea that if I'm just in the right place,
the run command should grab whatever local environment
is the one I've set up,
rather than explicitly going and finding the environment,
activating the environment, et cetera.
- So it looks like when you say Pixie run,
there's no Pixie activate or any of those things, right?
How's that work?
- Yeah, so the way conda environments work
is that you need to have some sort of little activation
thing where basically the past variable,
environment variables changed and adjusted.
And some other activation scripts are run.
And with Pixie, what we're doing is we run those
in the background and then we extract all the environment
variables that are necessary for the activation
basically to work.
And then we just inject it right before we execute
what you want to execute, like Copy in this case.
- Yeah, so there's like an implicit activate,
or you don't even have to say activate in Python.
You can just, if you just use that Python,
you say the path to the virtual environment Python run,
that's sufficient, yeah?
- Yeah, that's more or less what happens.
Sometimes packages can have different requirements
when it comes to activation.
So like Python doesn't have many requirements
when it comes to activation, but some other packages,
they might need some other environment variables
that are specific to the environment location
where they are installed, et cetera.
- Sure, well, even Python virtual environments
can get weird where you can set environment variables
that get set during the activation
of the virtual environment, right?
Like I don't think many people do that
'cause it's transient, but it could.
- We also have a pixie shell command.
So if you want to have that experience
of like an activated environment,
you can use pixie shell and then it is like basically a shell
that acts like an activated environment.
Like Poetry has the same and many other.
- Yeah, sure.
Now, the example here shows like I'm in the top level
of the project and I say pixie run.
What if I'm like three directories down?
I say pixie run, what happens then?
- Yeah, then the exact same thing will happen
because pixie runs from the root of the project
and all your tasks are by default running
from the root of the project.
So you define them with the path in your project
as they are always, and then where you are,
you can run those tasks as they are.
But if you want to run something in that directory,
you can just use pixie run and then your own commands
to act on that directory.
There's this other way of using it.
Like the pixie itself will run down the path that you're in
and we'll find the first pixie project that it encounters.
And for instance, pixie itself has some examples.
So if you move into the examples directory
and then in one of the examples,
those are their own pixie project.
So if you run it there, pixie run start,
it will start the example instead of the--
- Interesting.
So you could have a nested one, like there's a main one,
but then inside you could have a little sub pixie projects.
Yeah, a little bit like Node and NPM in that regard.
- Yeah.
- We have an issue that's open about mono repo support.
- Yeah, so I was gonna say, this sounds like,
yeah, this sounds like a really good idea
for mono repo support.
- So there's a different problem
that you normally would mono repos
have some shared dependencies.
So if you, for instance,
have in your root of your repository,
you have Python dependency defined,
then you want that shared between all the packages,
yeah, down in your repo tree.
So that's something we still have to support.
So right now there are like actual separate projects
and the pixie tool will just find the first projects
it encounters, but we need some kind of way
to define a workspace or mono repo,
if you would say it like that.
And then you could like link those environments together.
And if you start a lower level one,
you would start the main one with it
or something like that.
- Got it, all right.
Look at the dependencies of the top one
and then you might add some more
in your little sub project type of thing,
something like that.
Well, even what you already have
sounds pretty excellent for you.
- Yeah, so currently if you have like a system
where you have a backend server
that's completely Python or Rust or whatever,
you could have that as a separate project
and then have another project that is like the front end.
So you do some, you install MPM there or whatever.
And those are completely separate within your repository
and the main repository is just some tooling
to for instance, limit everything
or something like that,
or install your base dependencies
that you wanna use in the complete repository,
but you could already split it up pretty nicely.
- Yeah, well, I'm sure if you have a truly large organization
with the mono repo, which for people that don't know,
that just means like all the code
or the whole organization is in one huge repository
instead of a bunch of projects.
But dependencies across projects,
it's just within that kind of that file structure.
It's a lot.
I was complaining about having a dependency
that had two things that went in the same library,
both lower than and greater than some version number.
That's for one project.
You put it all together,
it's only gonna get more challenging.
So tools like this, these sub projects and stuff,
I think could help go like,
all right, this part needs these things
'cause that's the data science part.
This other part needs that thing
'cause that's the microservice part.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Nice.
So what else do people know about Pixie?
Taking PRs and contributions?
- Definitely.
We also started like pretty early.
So we love people that test Pixie
and tell us the feedback on like our Discord channel
or on like GitHub.
I think we have discussions open as well and issues.
Any feedbacks appreciated.
And we're really like trying to take package management
to the next level that includes like building packages,
that includes like package signing,
stuff like this, security, et cetera.
There are so many things and issues to work on.
And I think it's going to be very fun.
- Yeah.
- I'm also actually organizing packaging con.
That's happening in like a week from now actually.
And really looking forward to that.
So that's going to be fun to chat with a lot of other.
- Does it have an online component?
- Yeah, virtual.
So it's in Berlin, but it's also hybrid.
So you can join virtually if you want.
- Will the videos be on something like YouTube later?
- Yep, yep, for sure.
- Okay, cool.
If the timing lines up,
you'll have to give me the link to the videos
and I'll put it into the show notes for people.
We might somehow miss like the conference runs,
but the videos aren't yet up.
But if they are, send me a link
and we'll make it part of the show
so people can check it out.
- And one of Prefix Bas will also talk about
these Rust crates that we've been building
and how it all fits together.
If you want to learn more about that
and if you want to contribute,
like also if you want to learn Rust,
like we're more than happy to kind of like help you,
like guide you as time permits, obviously, but we-
- We're trying to be really active on our channels.
So on GitHub, we have some good first issues.
And if you have some questions, just ask around.
And then our Discord, we're very active
and really try to react as fast as possible to anything.
- Right at the bottom of prefix.dev,
you've got your little Discord icon down there.
So people can click on that to kind of be part of it, right?
- I think it's also-
- You try to litter it there.
Yeah.
- I see that you, yeah, I see you all both are like me
and have like decided, not accepted that
that X Twitter is called X.
- Yeah.
- I'm not changing my mind.
- They should come out with the final logo, right?
Like that can't be it.
- I can't be it, it's like a child drew it.
Like I'm just, this is what I got and it's there.
Maybe I need, I should probably put an EX Twitter in there
just for, you know.
Yeah.
And then a quick question from Elliot's,
any meaning behind the name Pixie?
- We thought very long about the name.
We had a bunch of different versions,
like initially we thought PX, just P and X.
But that was-
- Have you considered X?
I can hear you just use that for whatever.
Just kidding, sorry, back to Twitter for a second.
- That name is burnt.
- It is burnt.
- We also thought about PAX, like P-A-X,
but that's apparently executable
that you already have on your system
if you're using Linux or Mac.
So that didn't work because-
- Oh, that'd be tricky.
- The completion is broken and all of that.
We thought about P-E-X, I don't know.
Like we wanted to derive it a little bit
from the name prefix
because that's kind of the company name.
But Pixie seemed really cool
because it's apparently a magical fairy
and we can make a package management magic.
- Yeah, exactly.
I think the name is great.
It's short enough to type, it's pretty unique.
You can, it's somewhat Googleable, right?
- Yeah, you can pronounce it.
- Yeah.
- That was also important to it.
- Yeah, you don't have to debate,
is it Pi-Pi or is it Pi-P-I?
Like, let's say, no, like,
make it lowercase, it's not an acronym,
you don't say the letters.
- And before, like, we created this thing called Micromamba,
which I don't want to like go into too much detail,
but a lot of people complained
about Micromamba being too long to type.
So we had to stay under the five character limit.
- Yeah, I think there's value in that.
There's definitely value in that.
So let's close out our conversation
with where you all are headed.
What's next?
- Yeah, like, we are super excited
about a bunch of upcoming features.
One is definitely what I already mentioned, Pixie Build,
so that you can build packages right away from Pixie.
Source--
- To prepare them for Conda Forge, right?
- Well, for Conda Forge,
or like maybe you also have some internal stuff
for your own private things and stuff.
And we just want to make that easy,
because that is currently way too hard
to like make a Conda packages, like a bunch of steps.
And that also kind of precludes
that you could use source and get dependencies
for like other Pixie projects,
because basically what we do,
what we will do in the background is like,
if you depend on a source dependency
for another Pixie project,
we will build it into a like package on the fly
and then put it into your environment.
And then like integrating with the PyPI ecosystem,
that's what we're actually working on the most right now.
And that is the RIP thing that I told you about.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
- Because we just see a lot of need in the community
to have this, a lot of, yeah,
projects in the wild are kind of mixing it.
- Yeah, if you get it working with PyPI,
I will switch my stuff over and give it a try,
and see how it works.
So, but until then I can't, right?
I've just got, I've got like hundreds of packages
and a lot of them I'm sure are just unique to PyPI.
- Yeah, so we are not far away.
Like I think the hard bits are solved
and that was like resolving
because it works quite different from Conda.
You need to like get the individual wheel files
to get the metadata, et cetera.
And like, that doesn't scale
if you need all the metadata upfront,
which is actually the case in Conda.
You have all the metadata upfront,
but with PyPI you don't.
And so we had to make the solver lazy.
We had to make the solver generic
and we are through that process now.
And now it's basically just engineering work
in that sense to integrate it with Pixie.
But it's going to happen and it's going to be nice, I'm sure.
Yeah, we also have some ideas of like,
can we somehow merge Pixie Toml into PyProject Toml
so that it's like more natural to like Python developers
and you only need to manage one file.
And I think PyProject Toml gives us the flexibility
that we would need to do that.
- I think it does.
You've got things like Hatch and others
that kind of got a way to go in there.
- Yeah.
And then we have some other ideas
that are a bit more out there maybe,
but or not really,
but like we already have a set up Pixie action for GitHub.
That's really nice.
And then another idea is like,
how can you go from a virtual environment
to a Docker image easily?
So that's also something that we're thinking about.
- Okay. - These kind of things.
- But yeah, all very exciting.
- Awesome.
- How long has this been around?
Your blog post is two months old,
but it's announcing this stuff, so.
- Yeah, I mean, I think we maybe made the repository public
a month earlier than the blog post or so,
but it like prefix as a company
is like just very little over a year old.
And that's when we like really started to build the website,
the platform, Pixie, Rattler and all of these things.
So I think Pixie we started maybe like five months ago.
So not too old, still very fresh.
- Yeah, yeah.
It still has that new software smell.
- Yeah. (laughing)
- Yeah, I hope we don't get the, yeah, like.
- The old and moldy stuff.
- But we also know how to, yeah.
- You don't want that.
- But still, like personally,
I'm very surprised how stable it is already.
And I think that's partly due to the use of Rust
and the fact that we can very heavily check
some of the inner workings of the tool before we ship it.
- Yeah.
Well, it looks like it's off to a really good start.
I like a lot of the ideas here.
So yeah, keep up the good work.
Before we wrap it up, we're basically out of time,
but you know, there's the,
always the open source dream of,
I'm gonna build a project, it's gonna get super popular.
The dream used to be,
I'm gonna do some consulting around it, right?
I've created Project X, Project X is popular
so I can charge high consulting rates.
That's the dream of the 90s.
I think the new dream is,
I'm going to start a company around my project
and have some kind of open core model
and something interesting there.
You guys have prefix.dev.
What's the dream for you?
How are you approaching this?
I think a ton of people would be interested
to just hear how did you make that happen, you know?
- So you saved the hardest question for last.
- You don't have to answer it,
but I do think it's interesting, yeah.
- I think package management is a hard problem
and there are lots of sort of sub problems
that I would say enterprise customers
in a way are willing to pay for.
That includes like security,
managed repositories, let's say,
like basically Red Hats and like,
more or less Red Hats product
is that they have just like,
I know five or 10 years or something like of support
for like old versions of packages for enterprise customers.
And I think we have a pretty interesting approach
to package management that is pretty easy to kind of grasp.
And like part of why we want to make PixieBuild a thing
is also because we want people to make more packages
and then upload them to our website
and kind of grow this entire thing in popularity
and make it super useful so that we hopefully end up
with customers that are supporting our work.
- Awesome.
Well, good luck to both of you
and thanks for being on the show
to share what you're up to.
- Sure.
Thank you.
- Yep, bye all.